Well, congratulations.
I have a new book.
I've talked with Andre Brink.
I've interviewed a number of your country men and women.
I did an interview with Nadine Gortimer a couple of years ago when she was at Harvard, pointing across the river to Harvard.
And...
It's quite a remarkable pantheon of literary writers.
It is, it is.
The one sad thing, as far as the outside world is concerned, is that nobody seems to know the whole array of very good black writers we also have.
For some reason, only a few white writers became internationally known.
Why do you suppose that is?
I think universal racism, really.
Really?
But also, there were practical reasons most of the black authors were
only concerned with promoting the struggle for liberation.
And literary reasons and international reputation were the last things they would be thinking about.
It is interesting.
This is the first post-apartheid novel for you, I believe.
Yes.
And that must have been quite a challenge for you.
Very much so.
It's almost like John le Carre writing about... Yes, I think he finds himself in much the same position.
And I've had the opportunity over the last few years to talk very often with writers from the Central European countries.
And many of those have stopped writing altogether.
They say there's nothing left to write about.
But I think that takes a very short view, short-term view of it.
I think it also takes a pretty short-term view of what a novelist is.
Absolutely.
Now maybe if you're a writer who writes just about the political conditions in your country, then maybe that's true.
Yes.
Then you're out of a job.
And this really is what I want to explore today because I write a literary column and of course I'm interested in
in the political conditions and statements that you make, but the craft of writing is what... Absolutely, and I think that is the sanest thing that came out of the changeover there as far as writers were concerned, that at long last one can be judged purely in terms of the quality of one's writing, not in terms of the cause you promote or whether you're on the good or the bad side or whatever.
And I think that's very healthy for literature.
You know, there is an attitude, unfortunately, here in much of the United States, and England as well, where, you know, I don't know what the situation is in South Africa, where people read purely for entertainment, and you really do get a lot of mindless things.
Oh, yes.
Maybe we could just enter the discussion, if you could give me some insight on your...
attitude as to what... I mean, does writing, does your fiction have to be relevant, I guess, as a place to start?
Is relevance a necessary emolument of your writing?
I think... To me personally, that is... To me personally, that is important.
But then relevance, of course, is a very elastic term, too.
During the apartheid years, it was important for me, immensely important,
to get across an image of what was happening in the country and to try and interpret it, of course, basically for myself but also for others, at a time when journalists simply couldn't do their job because they were proscribed by so many laws in the country.
And it meant that novelists had to start doing some practically ordinary journalistic reportage in their novels
But the test for the novel has always been and remained even in those difficult times whether it can make something lasting out of the events of every day.
In other words, to go through the surface of the purely political menu of the day and to try and grapple with those deeper human emotional problems which
concern people anywhere in any society of the world and it was a very great reassurance to me very often to to get letters for instance from people in India or Pakistan or North Ireland saying that you may think that you wrote a novel about South Africa but in fact it is about India or about Ireland and that sort of thing because
It is the human story, what really happens to people, to individuals, men, women, children, that concerns me, and not politics as an ideology or as a theoretical system somewhere out there.
My own sense is that the novelist who becomes too politicized tends to wind up writing boring novels.
Absolutely, yes.
Because if you want to thump a barrel, then get up on a stage and do that.
But if you use the novel as a form to express yourself, to explore the world, to discover what the world is like,
then the audience you target is different, the quality of your writing is different, your whole concern is different.
It seems to me that Solzhenitsyn was a great writer when he was writing novels, but then when he became so consumed... Appalling, appalling.
He's probably the most illustrious example of
of the pitfalls of political writing.
So you do walk a fine line, you do, don't you?
Absolutely, I'm very conscious of that, yes.
How important a story to you?
Enormously.
And it is becoming more and more consciously so because
In South Africa, where one can draw on at least two large streams of storytelling, the great narrative tradition of the West and the wealth of oral literature, or whatever you want to call it, in Black Africa,
And both of these, they can feed into one another, they can illuminate new unexpected aspects of each other.
And there's always been this treasure house of stories in Africa, in South Africa, as far as I'm concerned, among the black people, but also among the Afrikaners, who during the many years, a couple of centuries in which they subsisted mainly in the deep interior, cut off from the world outside.
had to entertain themselves and sustain themselves through the stories they told.
And now that apartheid is no longer there to impose a kind of order of precedence on things one regards as most important to be most urgently written, now I can go back to those stories that have been lying fallow and silent for so long.
And the imagination can...
run riot.
You open this new novel, of course, the grandmother is a storyteller, isn't she?
Yes, yes.
You're paying great tribute, I think, to that tradition.
And I think perhaps specifically in Africa, but I know also in some Slavic and Central European cultures, the women are indeed the storytellers.
They are the repositories of the
The wisdom, collective wisdom of people over the centuries.
And memory, of course.
Oh, yes.
I have written a book about, it's a non-fiction book, but it is about memory and records and preservation.
I'm very fascinated by all of these different aspects that I read about.
You wrote this book in English, I gather, is that correct?
No, I write everything with rare exception in both languages at the same time.
I've never heard of such a thing.
It is weird.
I must confess I don't know, and I don't know in advance, how a certain book is going to develop because each book seems to impose its own pattern and its own use of language.
In this one I wrote the contemporary parts in English, but the stories were all written in Afrikaans.
And then it means cross-translating.
Do you do all of your own translation?
Oh, yes.
Because it's much more than translation.
It's rewriting, rediscovering.
You write something, say, in Afrikaans, rework it in English, and in that process you discover things you hadn't realized while writing the Afrikaans.
So you go back to the Afrikaans.
And then you discover things you'd missed in the English.
Wow.
It's doing and throwing.
That's remarkable.
And it can go on endlessly, but at a certain moment, of course, you've got to say, now, stop.
And do you publish them simultaneously in both languages?
Usually, yes.
In this case, the Afrikaans one came out a few months earlier, but that was just due to the publisher schedule.
How about the thinking about the creative process here?
Do you switch between languages?
It happens in both languages, yes.
Yes.
That's remarkable.
And it started as a strategy for survival as a writer, really, because I used to write only in Afrikaans until my first book, Looking on Darkness, was banned.
And then suddenly I was a writer without a reader.
So simply to survive, to ensure that what I wrote in future could be read, I started writing in English as well.
You were a writer without a reader.
At that time, yes.
And then you're not a writer because you've got to be read to.
It was one of the most devastating discoveries of my life.
I'd suddenly written myself into oblivion, as it were.
I was a non-person in terms of writing.
And if writing is important to one, and obviously I live through writing, it is immensely important to me, then you need readers to...
And that, as I say, if I couldn't find the readers in my own country due to censorship, I had to make sure at least that my books could be published in English.
And from there I was fortunate enough to be translated in many other languages.
Did you leave the country?
No.
I, ironically perhaps, towards the end of the 60s, I left the country to live in Paris.
And it was then with the intention of... Yes, yes.
I had a very good friend in Paris and I could live with them.
So I went with the intention at least of assessing the possibilities of staying there permanently.
But then as it happened, the year I spent there was 68.
And as a result of everything that happened in the streets of Paris,
I just realized that there is a very important, very real link, a bond between an individual and a society.
And to live in Paris and criticize at a safe distance just wasn't on.
So I knew I had to go back and do my writing there, and that changed the whole tone of my writing.
And the first book that came out of that was Looking on Darkness, which got banned.
So all kinds of things flowed from that one decision, but I haven't regretted it for a moment.
So when you are mindfully, when you know that you are a writer without a reader, what happens?
Because you must have a reader in mind when you're writing.
I'm not always so sure of that.
I think when I am grappling with the first draft of a book,
then it's really only me and what's happening in the paper.
It's a complex of experience that I've got to work through and get to grips with for myself to find out what happened, what has it done to me.
And then when I start working on that text, then I have to start thinking of, well,
Am I going to get across what I want to?
So how is the reader going to react?
And that means that when I write in English, the target is different from the one in Afrikaans.
Because when I write in Afrikaans, I have to have in mind the sort of standard Africana of the time, the more or less conservative supporter of the National Party, Calvinistic, traditionalist.
And you've got to approach that quite differently from when you have a broad-minded liberal reader.
A broad in mind.
Well, then when you are writing the two languages, which let me repeat, I've never heard of... There are some.
I spoke to the Chilean novelist and playwright, Ariel Dorfman, recently.
Apparently he does the same.
I mean, even I.B.
Singer, for all the years that he lived in America here.
He kept writing in Hebrew, Yiddish or Hebrew.
It had to be Yiddish.
It would have been Yiddish, yes.
But I wonder then, when you are writing mindfully in two languages, do they become two different books?
Actually, yes, but that is...
also perhaps an elastic term.
Sometimes the differences are very, I mean, there are always differences.
Sometimes they're quite small, a matter of nuance, a matter of punctuation, a matter of paragraph division and so on.
Sometimes there are whole episodes in one book which are not in the other because they don't work.
Really?
Yes.
Yeah, how about this new book?
There's one longish episode in the Afrikaans one which is not in English.
And what is it and why is it not in English?
Basically, I still am not sure that I agreed with him, but my editor in Britain, he said that the point had been made in other episodes, and English is so much a language of understatement.
I thought it added something to it.
It was an incident from the narrator's youth at school, which I thought illuminated her sort of headstrongness and willfulness in a
slightly different way from the other episodes from that time.
But, well, there you are.
But sometimes it's purely a matter of finding, perhaps due to my control or lack of it, of the language, that something works in the one and not in the other.
I think we could probably water because he hasn't had an appointment yet.
Okay, we're back on.
We were talking about, I guess...
I was interested in how you had a long segment, you said, in the Afrikaans version of the new novel, which you did translate and use in the English language, and that mainly came as a comment from your English editor.
Yes.
But I just wondered briefly if you could... You said it was from the narrator's childhood.
Can you just tell me briefly what it was?
It concerns an episode at school when she was about...
12 or 13.
And they had a specific kind of inspection every week when the whole school gathered for morning prayers before they dispersed into the different classes.
And at this inspection, well, the nails would be checked and the hair would be checked.
But this is something which my wife actually told me that happened to her at her school.
They also had to be checked to make sure that they were wearing the regulation underwear.
So the prefect would march up and down the lines with rulers, lift the skirts and check that they were wearing the right kind of panties.
And in this particular case, a friend of the narrator's was wearing ordinary white panties and not the ones that she was supposed to wear.
And this child got terrified.
As a result of which the narrator, when the prefect reached them, started protesting and said she's not going to allow her friend to be subjected to this indignity.
So the narrator was summoned to the principal's office and got a talking to and a severe reprimand and so on.
And then they checked her underwear and she had the right ones on and nobody thought of checking the other girls.
I thought it revealed something about the way in which somebody can stand up for her own convictions and take the lap for somebody else.
And it says something about the terrible excesses of Africana society where males can inflict that kind of humiliation on women and girls.
It never occurred that you didn't object?
Oh, I had a long discussion, but I have a very good relationship with this editor.
I don't always yield, but he is really so astute and so sensitive that I thought, all right, in this one I'll... So you were thinking of the English language nuances here, I guess.
Yes, yes.
But at least, you know, with the vast majority of writers who...
and I'm sure this happens with you in other languages,
You know, you submit the work to somebody else, and you are totally at their mercy, aren't you?
Yes.
And they do make it.
Which means that you've got to trust them.
And for many, many years, I never really had anybody who cared enough to do proper editing.
I mean, they would do little grammatical things, stylistic things here and there, or I would have a discussion, and someone would say, well, I don't think this episode works for this and this and the other reason.
Yes.
And then I could consider and either change or not change.
But this, for the first time, and I moved to this publishing house in Britain, Secker and Warburg, only six years ago.
And for the first time I landed with a real old-fashioned editor who knows his job, who's sensitively on the same wavelength, usually.
So I have a wonderful feeling of trust and security there.
And that's why I listened.
That's a great story.
I've been beyond the language, and you've already told me who your sense of your reader is.
Apparently it's different.
It has to be.
Even in small practical ways, for instance, if I write for an Afrikaans audience, there's quite a lot of writing on the purely information level of the book, which I can take for granted.
My readers know where they share the country.
But if I have to tell the same story to a foreign audience, we simply have to give a little bit more, flesh out a little bit more of the information.
You can't just fling a date or an episode from history at them.
You've got to suggest what that episode was about.
And, of course, when you're describing this whole phenomenon of raising ostriches for their feathers, that's the kind of thing you have to have absolutely right.
Oh, yes.
For that audience.
That's right.
Here, we're going to believe whatever you tell us.
It's remarkable.
Oh, those palaces.
Unfortunately, the sad thing is that so many of them have been torn down.
Uh-huh.
I suppose they're just too expensive to keep up, like the old stately mansions in Britain.
But the few that have remained are remarkable.
And apparently that, it's been told to me in many ways, perhaps a legend, but apparently it was based on fact, the way in which these houses had the sort of shadow image of the house in the cellar.
which functioned almost as a kind of subconscious to the house every room had its counterpart below the ground and these idiots actually lived there because there were only these few large families and they intermarried all the time because they didn't want to marry with commoners so after a generation or two each family had one or two or more little idiots and they were kept down there with their nannies
and allowed out only once a week on Sunday afternoons between 2 and 3, when everybody was having a sayesta.
And that was known as the Hour of the Idiots.
And that's practically when all the neuroses and psychoses are let out.
It's such a fantastic metaphor.
And of course I love the Arabic folk.
I read this one to my wife, where the granddaughter says, are you afraid of the ghosts?
She says, no, I know them all.
I love that.
Oh yes, she just sort of brushes them aside.
But this must come from that rich, small storytelling.
Absolutely.
But at the same time, it is metaphorical about the sort of adaptation South Africans have to make now.
They've got to live with their ghosts.
And unless we make peace with our past, we don't have a future to go to.
So, we haven't even addressed yet the challenge of having a narrator as a woman and thinking as a woman.
I'd love to hear your comments on the...
That's a very risky thing to do.
I knew it was an enormous risk, especially in these times.
But I had two good reasons for persevering.
The one is the simple fact that I am married to a wife who won't let me get away with anything.
And she went through this manuscript with a fine-tooth comb, saying, a man would say that, a woman would never argue like this.
This is a man's way of looking at a scene, or somebody else, a woman would see it this way.
So she helped me enormously there.
But it has seemed to me, from the beginning,
But I'd often written genealogies in my previous, sorry, my third, sir.
I'm sorry, you said you'd often written what?
Genealogies.
Cheers, nice to meet you, sir.
Very nice to meet you.
In most of my previous books, there is a family tree of one kind or another.
but invariably they are told from a male point of view.
I think the whole idea of a family tree is male in origin.
So-and-so begat so-and-so begat so-and-so.
And it seemed to me that part of what got lost in the process of transmitting the South African history
was the huge dimension of the female experience.
We had to undergo this history, and they were not allowed to talk for themselves.
They almost, well, they metaphorically had their tongues cut out, as this one girl in one of my stories physically has her tongue cut out.
So...
It was important for me to try and transmit something of the store of stories lived by women.
But I don't think I could have done that if I'd run the risk of simply appropriating a woman's voice and speaking on behalf of women.
And the fortunate thing is that in South Africa right now,
We have a whole array of very, very good women authors who can and do speak for themselves.
So my book is one voice among many, and it's up to anybody to say.
I'm not going to listen to you because you're a man and I have these women's voices.
Have you encountered any of that?
Not a single note of hostility from a female reviewer.
I got one totally vicious, devastating review.
That's excellent.
Lovely, thank you.
Yeah, lovely, very good idea.
There was one man in England
who accused me of being a barrel-thumping feminist and getting it all wrong.
But not a single woman reviewer was uncomfortable with it.
Well, what was his objection?
That you were too sympathetic to him?
Well, he just thought that I was trying, going out of my way to do the politically correct thing, but for that very reason doing the wrong thing by appropriating a woman's voice.
I wonder what might have happened had you published this
under a feminine suit.
You know, I was very tempted to do that.
I really was.
We were really remarkable to see what might have happened.
Yes.
Just as an exercise, as an exercise in...
I mean, Doris Lessing has published under... She's a famous example.
She hasn't changed genders, so to speak, but she has changed identities.
Yes.
Oh, yes.
No, I really was very tempted.
Why don't we just shut this off for a while?
Or do you want me to leave it on?
But you just go ahead and eat.
Don't mind that.
Okay.
Because I wonder, when you have a reader, again, we're going back to the reader, do you think the reader...
I'm able to divorce the knowledge that the author is a man.
Nevertheless, the voice is that of a woman.
Did you see that as a problem for the reader?
I imagine that it could be for some people, but I just hope that the reader could take the jump with me.
When you create a voice like this, do you hear the voice?
Oh, yes.
You hear her voice?
You visualize it?
Physically, oh, yes.
And when you're writing, I mean, I'm just curious about the process here.
This voice... Well, I would very often read passages aloud to myself to check whether it sounds right.
But I certainly hear that voice very strongly.
And I think all writing, all fiction writing, does start with an act of presumption.
You have to presume that you can get into somebody else's mind, whether it's another man, or whether it's a woman, or whether it's a black person, or in some cases the presumption must be greater than others.
But that initial act of imagining yourself into the skin of somebody else
That is always there.
So this is just an extension of that.
That to me is the gift of anomalous.
I can't do that.
And I think that is the starting point of fiction.
How about the element of imagination in creating the story, the plot?
How do it just use as a case study this new novel?
Did you start with an idea that, okay, this is post-apartheid?
I want to write about... No, there was no... It wasn't such a conscious decision.
I think if I have to trace it to a specific incident, normally a novel starts when a number of incidents start coalescing and growing together.
But I previously taught it at another university, and
The secretary I had there, her father lived alone on a farm, and very shortly before the election, a number of months before, her father's farmhouse was attacked in the night by just my band of youth who set fire to it.
And he got very severely burnt and died a few days later.
This happened at a time when, after a very long absence, when I hadn't visited that particular region in the country, I went back to that region where the ostrich palaces were.
And these two episodes seemed to get together and some kind of spark was struck.
and things.
So the image of the house was the starting point.
Really?
And the episode of the person who got burnt, in this case a father but for my book a mother, was the trigger.
Fascinating.
Do you plot these things out heavily in advance or do you allow them to?
I usually do an enormous amount of plotting.
One thinks that is the whole iceberg below the surface.
It is only when I have a pretty clear idea of the book as a whole that the writing can start.
But even so, even though I may think that I know every nook and cranny of the story, when I actually start writing, all kinds of unforeseen things happen and must happen, otherwise I'd lose interest.
In this particular book, in the most horrendous episode of the whole book, the conclusion, I didn't know that was going to happen.
Really?
It was only when I got to it that suddenly I realized, God, there's nothing else that can happen to this woman.
And so it happened.
You started with the image of this house.
At what point did the character enter the equation?
Her voice.
the the old woman came into the book practically together with the image of the house and just seemed to go with it the young woman took a long time i didn't know initially i thought well it's going to be too risky to use a woman's voice
try and make it a young man.
But it just wasn't right.
Because to me it was immensely important that the story of the family be transmitted from woman to woman.
Then I tried all kinds of clever ways out to avoid having the woman as the narrator.
I thought I could just use her.
either a friend of a young woman to tell her story or simply do it in the third person.
But that was too remote and I needed the immediacy of the experience.
And having known and still knowing quite a number of the ANC exiles who came back to South Africa and living quite
intimately and disconcertingly with some of their stories and enormous problems they faced when they came back from exile.
That became a given for the book.
now this is um you don't mind my jumping around a little bit i understand that i've read the book so i don't have to really ask questions about the book that's my job to read it you know you've done your job just to write this book you know i'm really interested the kinds of stories that i write
You have written now, what, about a dozen books, I think it is?
Well, a dozen novels, exactly, a dozen that have been translated into English or written in English.
I wrote a number of other things only in Afrikaans, I mean, plays and literary criticism and travel books and things like that.
And you were how old, though, when I just started curiously?
Now, 61.
Young man.
So, I mean, you really haven't had a chance to assess the arc of your career, so to speak.
You certainly can see some dramatic outside influences that pretty much determine where it's going, or where it is right now.
And what does one do next?
You have a number of many novels ahead of you, I'm sure.
Oh, yes, I hope so.
I think I have, for such a long time,
practically from the time I started writing.
Would you like to keep this on the side?
Would you like I keep on the kitchen for you, sir?
What are you doing?
Keeping the kitchen?
If you don't mind.
I am here to serve you.
Give us about five more minutes.
Yes, I should be fine.
I've had this very passionate interest in history for a long time.
And I can't see that dissipating in any way.
But I can now go back to tracts of South African history which have remained unexplored.
There are silences there which have not been visited.
uh sometimes of course people were scared of him because we didn't know about it all and much of that is coming to light through the truth and reconciliation commission at the moment or simply because during the apartheid years
even if it was never a matter of feeling constrained to write about a parted, there simply always were more urgent things to write about than some of these wonderful stories that were there but had to be kept on the back burner.
To me, the liberating effect of doing it in a more imaginative way.
Perhaps to go more into myth and into history.
Myth, was that the word?
This started happening even before this book.
The previous one was on the contrary.
I had a...
a wonderful, authentic historical character from the 18th century, a Frenchman who came to South Africa and fell foul of the authorities and laid a rebellion and ended being executed for that.
But his signal characteristic was that he was a consummate liar.
And he told his own life story several times before he was executed, writing long letters to the government explaining his life, and every time telling a totally different story.
So I could start where he left off and keep on inventing this fantastic creature.
That's remarkable.
And so this is something that has occupied me for quite a while now, and I think I can go more, you know, all sales set,
into this kind of mode.
That's great.
It comes to Shihara Zai's character all the time, presenting a story about himself.
Absolutely.
I wonder, and what's the truth, and what is it, and does it matter?
I mean... Does it matter?
That's the question.
Simple point is that facts hardly ever matter unless you can transform them into a kind of mythical truth.
And that is what really concerns me deeply.
Do you see your work, the 12 novels, and even the other works that you've discussed for me as a corpus, as a body of work that is best, even though we're probably in mid-career right now, and I asked this to Nadine Gortimer, you know, is it a corpus?
She says, absolutely.
She said,
fascinating location she said she says all of her books she compared it with going into a into an exhibition room and looking at a sculpture and it's one sculpture and every book is almost a different view of walking around and looking at the same piece from different angles and i wonder you know that's a wonderful metaphor it's like the old elliott thing every every attempt is a holy new start and a different kind of failure
And it is no truism, but I think for that very reason there is a fair amount of truth in it, that every writer spends his whole life through the writing of one book.
And you try it from this angle, and either it doesn't work, or it doesn't go far enough, or for the moment it is okay, but then you discover more in yourself that has to go into that, so you approach it from another angle, from the inside, from wherever.
reconstruct the edifice.
Are you also a firm believer, I mean, you've written so many books that are so important to your country, to their history, and reflect what was going on in your country at this time?
Do you believe that all of these books absolutely reflect your development as a writer at a certain time?
I mean, given the chance, like Henry James would go back and rewrite some of these words, you know, pulled around with his poetry and made them worse.
Our own Walt Whitman was constantly revising his works up until the day he died.
How do you feel about that?
Or does a work speak for you at that certain point in your life in his completed work?
I think it's the latter part.
Sometimes I have to go back for one reason or another to one of my old books when a film company gets interested or whether a new edition is prepared.
Are you ever tempted?
I have been tempted on a few occasions but then immediately I would realize it would become a totally different book and to do it halfway or half-heartedly
That's not the way to do it.
Either you leave it as it is, make a few tiny little, uh, stylistic changes here and there, or you rewrite the whole thing and I definitely don't.
Then I'd rather write a new novel and try and revisit the same problematic in a totally different way.
as you finish yours.
Your character and her companion in Paris have a shared passion for Shakespeare.
The Shakespeare passion of yours?
Absolutely.
My great Jordan Patrick.
I've just published in South Africa a small book on Shakespeare.
Mm-hmm.
And I hope to extend it into a proper full-length, several hundred-page study in the near future.
I didn't know this.
I just sensed it from the... I really... I think it goes back to my mother.
At a time, and in circumstances, when Afrikaans was the language of every little town in which we lived, and the whole culture was absolutely drenched in the tradition of Afrikanadom, but she had grown up, although she was Afrikaans-speaking, she'd grown up in a part of the country where English was more common.
From early youth, she had a passion for literature, especially for Dickens and Shakespeare.
So from a fairly early stage, she inculcated this into us and also introduced one day a week of English speaking at home.
And if we lapsed into Afrikaans, you would get a bad mark, the one with fewest bad marks at the end of a month.
got a shilling which in those days was wealth.
So for mercy and other reasons I had learnt English and very early discovered Shakespeare and I've just been doting on him ever since.
I don't know if you have going on in your country now what's going on here.
It's called the Canon Wars.
It's a battle over what works into the literary camp.
Oh, yes.
And Genby's book, as a matter of fact.
Yes.
addresses itself to this.
There are people who say that they call them dead white European males.
Why should we read Shakespeare, Sir Heinke's, Tolstoy?
What would we be without them?
I am mind-boggling that this should even be an issue.
Absolutely.
I think the danger enters into it when one reads them exclusively and
I think one should always be very elastic in one's approach to this, that this canon is being added to over time and in recent years I think the greatest writers in the English language, thank you, have really come from
what used to be the frontiers of the empire, from India and Rushdie, from South Africa and Jane Kutze, from Canada and Atwood, you know, you can go on.
Of course, there are great writers in America and there are some good writers in England.
But I think the really exciting renewal of the language and the literature happens from the frontiers, England.
And English is such a resilient language that it allows us to be used by so many days.
I think we did right here.
I think the salmon was a good choice.
Yes.
It looks very succulent.
Sometimes it tends to be a good guy.
During the apartheid years, inevitably, I was regarded, usually when I travelled abroad, I did a lot of travelling, as almost primarily a political commentator.
And I was deeply aware of the kind of responsibility one incurs when you write about a situation like that, and you've got to try and interpret the country when you have the opportunity.
But many people tended to forget that I was a fiction writer,
and now with apartheid moral is gone and excellent politicians in place to speak for themselves I just find it an exhilaration to to become only a writer only a writer is already more than one can handle um
We talked about that you are, by temperament, and certainly the results of what you've produced over your career attest to it.
You're a fiction writer by Merrill.
The circumstances.
What happened?
Could you have written fiction and withdrawn yourself from the political climate?
No.
No, it was just...
from that time in Paris when I made the decision to come back to South Africa you see the background to that is that I had lived in Paris previously I studied Paris for two years from 59 to 61 and that was a shocking experience jolting me out of all the comfortable assumptions I had
just taken for granted previously, coming from a very conservative Afrikaner background, supporters of the National Party, very religious.
And Paris, perhaps because it coincided with Sharpeville in 1960, just broke down all of that.
But I couldn't stay on longer.
My money simply ran out.
to start building something new in the place of everything I dismantled.
And when I went back to South Africa late in 61, it was very resentful.
I really bore the place a grudge.
I didn't want to be there.
I thought of South Africa as a kind of poor relative.
I was embarrassed by it.
It sounds like your character here to some degree.
Yes.
Well, one keeps on drawing on one's own experiences.
I'm sorry?
No, no, no, not at all.
For about ten years, what I wrote after my return, those books were set in Paris.
With the exception of one, they were not translated into English.
I didn't want to write about South Africa, I just didn't think it was interesting enough.
But when I went back the second time after 68, that was a conscious decision to go back.
And I realized then that if I had to compete with writers and the rest of the world, and thank God I don't think writers need to compete,
then the only thing that I could offer which was different from theirs was South Africa, was my roots as an Afrikaner.
And suddenly this became so fascinating, even though I continued to loathe much of what I saw around it.
And I was horror-struck by the more and more I discovered about the Afrikaner past.
But I also discovered some wonderful things.
And the main thing was that I was fascinated by the whole process through which something develops from roots to through tree trunk to through branches to flowers.
Here in this country, during the years of slavery, there was a crime for a black person to know how to read.
Really?
Yeah, there was a crime.
And there were laws on the books.
I mean, you could be imprisoned.
What?
Of course.
I mean, we're going back 130 years or so.
Yeah, but it's not all that far.
That's not all that far.
In fact, in Manuel's book, he mentions the law, and he cites the law.
which I wish I'd had for my book.
If you found the law, I wish I'd been alerted to find it myself.
But in your country, of course, it was a criminal offense, but yet your books were banned.
You were told that what you were writing was, what, dangerous?
Subversive.
And communistic.
And blasphemous.
And pornographic.
Did you feel physically threatened?
Yes.
Or was it intellectually threatened?
No, the banning of a book was really only the starting point.
Because if a book was banned and they regarded you as a threat to the security of the state, that time hallowed phrase,
It meant that the security police took an active interest in you and I would be under constant surveillance and sometimes my house would be searched or I would be interrogated by the police and they would confiscate my manuscripts and even my typewriters just to make it difficult to operate.
Would they be returned or they would not?
Eventually they were returned after about a year.
And even when I went abroad, when I went to Europe or to Britain, I would always be followed, even abroad.
And my mail was intercepted and my phone was tapped until the clerk was in office.
In fact, I wrote him a specific letter soon after he had released Mandela.
We'd been together at university, the clerk and I, which is why I can't stand the man.
But, by the way, I wrote him a letter saying I'm going to Europe very soon.
And it was just after Mandela came from prison.
And I know that many journalists are going to ask me about what has changed in South Africa.
So I told him in this letter, how do you expect me to tell them with an honest conscience that things have changed if in my own personal situation my mail is still intercepted and my phone is still tapped?
And then he wrote back saying, I'll ask the police to investigate, which I thought was beautiful.
But the interesting thing was that he did stop after that.
as far as I could tell, because previously they'd done it in such obvious, ostentatious ways that one couldn't miss it.
But since then, I have the impression that they discontinued it.
If they're doing it, they're doing it very well.
I mean, well, in the sense that efficiently, in a way that you want to work.
Did you have a fear for your perception, for your...
Well, they were risky, you know.
There were many death threats, you know, anonymous phone calls and letters and things.
Once there was an attack on my house, my car would be sabotaged.
and get letters to threaten the lives of my children.
That is tough.
But there were times when I came close to deciding that for the sake of my family I would have to leave.
But I'm just so glad I never did because to be there and to look through all of that
And so where we are today has just been an incredible adventure.
Did you expect it in the right time?
No.
That's an amazement, isn't it?
It remains a miracle.
And even if sometimes one saw signs that it couldn't go on for much longer, then the impression was that
There would have to be some great cataclysmic event, a total sort of revolution, bloodshed, whatever.
And we got through with it with very little, comparatively very little violence.
At the moment the country is having, experiencing much more violence than ever before, but it's criminal violence as in Russia.
as opposed to political.
Well, that's what you have to go through.
I'm afraid, sir.
I remember what's going on in Russia is momentum, of course.
I don't know how self-effort prepares to Russia.
One wonders if democracy would survive in Russia.
It's really touching down.
It really is.
If anybody thinks that the nuclear threat is gone, it will be held forever.
Yeah.
I think I'll just turn this tape on the other side.